---
layout: post
title: Problem 14
subtitle: Airplane Seat Problem
tags: [probability]
---
# Problem 11 : Airplane Seat Problem

Imagine there are n number of people in line to board a plane that has the same number of seats. The first person in line realizes he lost his boarding pass so when he boards he decides to take a random seat instead. Every person that boards the plane after him will either take their "proper" seat, or if that seat is taken, a random seat instead.

Question: What is the probability that the last person that boards will end up in his/her proper seat.

# Solution

Before proceeding to the solution let's recapitulate the fundamental defition of probability.

$$
P(event A)=\frac{Number of cases where event A takes place}{Total number of events possible}
$$

In our problem the event is the last person getting his\her alloted seat at the end of everyone's boarding.

Now, consider the best case where the first person coincidently sits on his actual seats. As a result all the remaining passengers also sit on their respective seats incluing the last one. 

The next best case is the first person sits on the last person's seat and all the passengers except the last one get their alloted seats. The last person sits on the alloted seat of the first person or on the wrong sit.

Proceeding to the next best case, where the first person sits on another person's seat and that person sits on the first person's seat. So, everone remaining get their repective seats as well as the last passenger. 

Similarly, the next case will be when the first passenger sits on another person's seat and that person sits on the last's passenger's seat. The last passenger will get the wrong seat as all the remaining seats are filled by then. 

So, in general if k is the number of people sits in the wrong seats then they fall into a loop where they sits in each other's seats. But the remaining people get to sit on thier repective ones($$ 0 \leqslant k \leqslant n & k \neq 1 $$). For the best case corresponding to k=0 where the last person gets the correct seat. The worst case where all the people sits in the wrong seats that correponds to k=n where the last person sits on the wrong seat. 

Now, there is two possible cases for each of the remaining values of k in which exactly half cases leads to the correct seat for the last person. So the total number of cases =$$1+1+2*(n-2)=2n-2$$ and the event A occurs in $$n-1(1+n-2)$$ cases.


This analysis leads to the probability = $$\frac{n-1}{2n-2}=\frac{1}{2}$$














