---
layout: post
title: Problem 25
subtitle: Möbius  Transformations
tags: [complex analysis, geometry]
---
# Problem 25 : Möbius  Transformations and Symmetry

On first glance, Möbius Transformation appears to be a simple ratio of two functions that are linear in the complex variable $$z$$.

$$
\zeta = f(z) = \frac{az+b}{cz+d}
$$

where points in the $$z$$ plane are mapped to points in the $$\zeta$$ plane.

But the transformation has several interesting properties. One of these properties involves preservation of a certain symmetry that will be discussed in this post. For all the Electrical Engineering folks reading this, it is safe to assume that you may have used something similar unknowingly (Smith Chart?).

# Möbius Transformation as a combination of simple transformations

Some algebra will reveal that the expression for $$f(z)$$ can be written as 

$$
f(z) = \frac{a}{c} + \frac{bc-ad}{c^2(z+\frac{d}{c})}
$$

We can break the above expression into geometric inversion, reflection, translation, rotation and scaling (expanding/shrinking). To see why, let us start with the term in the denominator,

$$
translate(z) = z + \frac{d}{c}
$$ 

The above function simply takes any point $$z$$ on the $$z$$-plane and shifts it by $$\frac{d}{c}$$. Therefore, this step is essentially translation of the points on the $$z$$-plane.

Next, let us define $$ z_{1} = z + \frac{d}{c} $$ and $$ inv(z_1) = \frac{1}{z_1}$$. The function $$\inv(z)$$ is a complex inversion of the complex argument $$z$$. Using a polar representation of $$z = r \exp(i\theta)$$, we can easily see this as -
$$
inv(z) = \frac{1}{r}\exp(-i\theta) 
$$

The $$\frac{1}{r}$$ part corresponds to geometric inversion (more details later) and note that the angle now is the same in magnitude but has changes its sign indicating a reflection about the Real axis.

Finally, let us define $$z_2 = \frac{1}{z_1}$$ and $$ rotscale(z_2) = \frac{bc-ad}{c^2}z_2$$. Also, let $$\frac{bc-ad}{c^2} = r_{scale} \exp(i\theta_{rot})$$ then, $$rotscale(z)$$ is a function that involves two operations which are rotation by $$\theta_{rot}$$ and scaling by $$r_{scale}$$. 

With this, we conclude that the Möbius Transformation is a composition of 5 simple transformations -- Scaling, Rotation, Reflection, Geometric Inversion and Translation. Also, this points to the fact that the corresponding mapping will be conformal as long as $$ad-bc \neq 0$$ (Why?).

## Geometric Inversion

Geometric Inverse of a point in this post is focused on the geometric inverse of a point within/outside a unit circle but it can be defined with respect to any arbitrary circle. 

For simplicity let us assume that the unit circle is centered at origin O then the geometric inverse of a point P within the circle will be a point on the ray connecting the point and the center (ray OP). Let us say that the point P is at a distance of $$a$$ from the circle and the inverse point P' is at a distance of $$b$$ then the point P' is an inverse of P if $$ab = radius^2 = 1$$.

Also, in the special case when the point P coincides with the center O, the inverse of P would lie at infinity. 

# Problem : Points that are inverses of each other in $$z$$-plane will remain inverses of each other in the $$\zeta$$-plane
