---
layout: post
title: Problem 30
subtitle: Formula for the nth prime
tags: []
---
# Problem 30 : A Formula for the nth prime

We will build the formula bottom up. So, let us begin!

# Wilson's Theorem ft. Quick Proof

If $$p$$ is a prime number then we must have $$ (p-1)! \equiv -1 (mod p) $$.

 It is easy to see that by the definition of a prime number if $$p$$ is not prime, it will be divisible by some number in between $$ 1 $$ and $$ p-1 $$. This implies that for any non-prime number $$p$$ we have, $$ (p-1)! \equiv 0 (mod p)$$.

 Now, if $$p$$ is prime, we are sure to have a non-zero remainder in the congruence relation. Furthermore, note that for any number $$x$$ in the range from $$2$$ to $$p-2$$ we must have another number $$y$$ within the same range such that $$xy \equiv 1 (mod p)$$. This can be understood by first noting that all numbers less than $$p$$ are relatively prime to $$p$$ i.e. $$gcd(q,p) = 1$$ $$\forall q < p$$. Furthermore, this fact combined with the Bezout's Lemma ([See Proof](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/203383/proof-of-gcda-b-axby-bezouts-identity)) which guarantees the existence of $$s,t$$ such that $$qs + pt = 1$$ gives us the result that $$ qs \equiv 1\;(mod\;p)$$ with $$s$$ being the modulo inverse of $$q$$.


# Using Wilson's Theorem to count primes

Now, we are in a position to use Wilson's Theorem to count primes! All we need to do is plug it into a function that would gives us zeros/ones depending on the primality. To this end, we can utilize a the cosine function as follows,

$$
\# \; of \; primes \; \leq i = \sum_{j=1}^i\left[\left(\cos \frac{(j-1) !+1}{j} \pi\right)^2\right]
$$

where the argument of the cosine is going to be a multiple of $$\pi$$ (thus, yielding a value of 1) if and only if $$j$$ is a prime.

# Using the prime counter to find the $$ n^{th} $$ prime

This is where the Willan's formula uses an interesting approach. I will directly reveal what's going on here..

The following function,
$$
f(x) = \left\lfloor{\left(\frac{x}{a}\right)}^{\frac{1}{x}}\right\rfloor
$$

attains a value over $$1$$ for all values of $$x$$ greater than $$a$$.

We can use this to our benefit! Instead of $$a$$ we can have the squared cosine term in the denominator that counts the number of primes $$\leq i$$ .

Then we can sum over all integers $$i$$ for a fixed value of $$x$$ so that we would know the value of $$i$$ at which the value of the floor of the function changes from 0 to 1. A little thought will reveal that the value of $$i$$ at which this cross-over from 0 to 1 happens as we increase $$i$$ would be the $$x^{th}$$ prime. 

# Bertrand's Postulate

This is the final step. Based on the analysis so far we have the following the equation with an unknown quantity $$M$$ that should be high enough so that we are able to reach the $$n^{th}$$ prime,

$$
P(n) =1+\sum_{i=1}^{M}\left\lfloor\left(\frac{n}{\sum_{j=1}^i\left\lfloor\left(\cos \frac{(j-1) !+1}{j} \pi\right)^2\right\rfloor}\right)^{1 / n}\right]
$$

This is where we need Bertrand's Postulate which states that there exists at least one prime number between $$m$$ and $$2m$$ $$\forall m \geq 2$$.

Using the smallest value of $$m$$ i.e. $$2$$ and proceeding with the inequality iteratively we can see that $$n^{th}$$ prime has to be less than $$2^n$$ therefore, a value of $$M = 2^n$$ would ensure that we get the right answer.

# Final Formula -- Willan's Formula

Now we can stare at the final formula for the $$n^{th}$$ prime which is pretty expensive and utilizes Wilson's Theorem at its core.

$$
P(n) =1+\sum_{i=1}^{2^n}\left\lfloor\left(\frac{n}{\sum_{j=1}^i\left\lfloor\left(\cos \frac{(j-1) !+1}{j} \pi\right)^2\right\rfloor}\right)^{1 / n}\right]
$$

