---
layout: post
title: Problem 32
subtitle: Proving an impedance formula
tags: []
---

# Problem 32 : Proving a circuit impedance formula

It was the roughly the start of 2015 with about a year left for JEE (Entrance Exams for IITs). Calculus and Analysis formed a big part of the syllabus. We were often asked to remember some strange infinite series that were, at times, quite useful for limits or approximating integral but never made complete sense to me. In my attempts to better understand this, I joined a couple forums such as Mathematics Stack Exchange and Brilliant.org. I had even subscribed to weekly reccurence and series newsletter from the Mathematics Stack Exchange and I often saw a lot of series and continued fractions. There was a lot of reference to complex analysis (something we eventually covered at IIT in our first year). Now that I look back, things are starting to make sense specially now that my work at MIT has led me to stumble upon similar things again in a different light. More specifically, this post is relies on Gauss's formula of continued fractions. 

This problem involves derivation of a generalized impedance formula (see below for explanation) $$ A (j\omega)^{-n} $$ where $$ j = \sqrt{-1}$$ and $$\omega$$ represents angular frequency of the response. The derivation is detailed in [this paper](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1149/1.2100789/pdf). As always, I will focus on delivering a "feel" of the method rather than going through all the steps. Let's jump right in... 

## The Problem 

The mathematical statement of the problem is as follows, we want to show that the following continued fraction,

$$
\begin{equation}
Z(\omega) = r_0 + \frac{1}{c_0 z + \frac{1}{r_1 + \frac{1}{c_1 z + \dots}}}
\end{equation}
$$

converges to $$ Z(\omega) = (j\omega)^{-n}$$ for $$z = j\omega$$ and certain values of the $$r_k$$ and $$c_k$$ values given by,

$$ r_k = 2h^n \frac{\Gamma(1-n)}{\Gamma(n)}\frac{\Gamma(k+n)}{\Gamma(k+1-n)} - h^n \delta_{k0}$$ 
and
$$c_k = (2k+1)h^{1-n}\frac{\Gamma(n)}{\Gamma(1-n)}\frac{\Gamma(k+1-n)}{\Gamma(k+1+n)}$$

## Wait, what is impedance and why do we care?

Simply put, impedance may be seen as a way to characterize electrical (and other coupled) properties of a system by applying a sinusoidal perturbations in a specific input variable (such as voltage) to record the response in an output variable (such as current). This perturbation can be applied for a range of frequencies to then calculate the ratio of the output to input variable. This ratio is analogous to "resistance" in Ohm's Law and when applied to the frequency domain is called impedance. Such an impedance (typically denotes as Z) which may be represented as a complex number (recall the Euler formula) is often represented by the locus of points i.e. a parameteric curve in the Re(Z) vs -Im(Z) [Why is this negative?] plane where the parameter is frequency ($$\omega$$). 

## Connecting the dots 

### The Genius of Gauss ft. Euler's Hypergeometric Series

 

### Transport Phenomena 

### Confluence

## Proof


